Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
the Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes
and to the Mgen by Doctor Mary Schenk. She
is associate professor of Anthropology, demography, and Asian studies
at Pennsylvania State University. She is a biocultural anthropologist,
human behavior. ECOLOGIST and anthropological demographer with interests in
marriage, family, kinship, parental investment, fertility, mortality, and inequality
and some other topics. And today we're going to
focus mostly on the sexual division of labor, kinship
systems, religion and fertility, and fertility decline, and some
other related topics. So, Doctor Shenk, welcome to the
show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
It's a pleasure to be here, Ricardo.
So, I would like to start by asking you
a little bit about the sexual division of labor.
So from an evolutionary perspective, how do you approach
it? I mean, how do we start here? Where
does it stem from?
So there's a couple of different um types of
arguments from, for sexual division of labor, and this
is an area of interest of mine, but it's
not my central area of interest. Um, BUT I
would say there's one argument for the sexual division
of labor comes from Um, literature focusing on the
different kinds of constraints that men and women have
with respect to children. So, because women have to
go through gestation and lactation, they're often directly responsible
for young children, and especially in the human past,
they could have had multiple young children at one
time. Um, TO take care of. And because of
that, there's often been an argument that this restricts
women from doing tasks that involve spending a long
time away from their kids, um, or where places
where you have to, you can't take your kids
with you, right? And so, that's one kind of
argument, whereas men don't have those same restrictions biologically.
So this is one underpinning for the sexual division
of labor. The other underpinning really comes from Economic
theories of complementarity in which you see um Any
kind of, uh, that any group of people, whether
they're men or women or anything else, um, could
have some people who specialize in one thing and
other people who specialize in another thing and by
cooperating and sharing, they're actually better off than if
everyone is trying to do the same thing because
you can get um more efficient at doing particular
tasks by specializing or practicing those tasks for long
periods of time. And so the arguments about the
sexual division of labor in human history usually involve
one or both of these things. Usually that there's
some kind of complementarity where some people should specialize
in one thing and other people should specialize in
other things, and that because of these underlying um
biological obligations that women have as mammals for um
gestation and lactation, you end up in a situation
where women are often specializing in tasks. That um
have less conflict with childcare than um men who
can who often specialize in tasks that have more
conflict with childcare. That's frequently true in human societies,
but we can all see with childcare, um, Inputs
from other group members, etc. YOU actually can have
a lot of variation across cultures, um, in, in
the sexual division of labor. Yeah.
Mhm. And I mean, in terms of the specific
tasks that we see cross-culturally being the most commonly
performed by men and women and that point to
a sexual division of labor, could you give us
perhaps some examples to illustrate what you just said
there? Sure, sure. So in many foraging societies, at
least the traditional view was that men were often
specialized in hunting and women were often specialized in.
Um, GATHERING plant materials. And you see that on
average across most foraging cultures that we have data
on, this is true, but you also see that
women are also hunting, and many of them, especially
hunting small game, um, and that men are often
doing gathering as well as hunting. So it's more
of an average difference than a, like a very
strict difference because as I'm sure you're aware, given
um Uh, what you do, um, there's a huge
amount of variation across human societies based on local
ecologies. So in foragers, we would have thought of
hunting and gathering, but again, more as an average
difference than a sliding scale because of course, women
are sometimes hunting and men are sometimes gathering also.
Um, IN horticulture and agriculture, um, how much labor
women versus men do tends to, um, be about
the kind of labor rather than specializations. So if
we're thinking about horticulture. In many horticultural societies, men
might focus on clearing the land and like taking
down the trees and moving large stones, and women
might be spending more time gardening, but men are
also gardening too. Um, AND in agriculture, there's a
lot of cross-cultural patterns, um, that suggest that it
kind of really depends on the type of labor.
So there is, um, I work in South Asia,
so in the Indian subcontinent. And one of the
really well-known historical relationships there is between wheat agriculture
and uh rice agriculture. And wheat agriculture um has
often been focused on plows as one of the
major things and planting and a lot of the
field work, more of the field work was done
by men than women. The women were also involved
in the harvest and other times. Whereas rice agriculture
historically, um, because it's so intensive in terms of
the planting, you have to hand plant all of
these tiny plants, and then you have to replant
them, etc. A lot of it has to be
done by, by hand. You saw a lot more
agricultural labor by women in those parts of the,
of South Asia with the argument that in fact,
um some of the social systems in those regions
were affected by this difference in the kind of
agricultural labor that was needed.
Mhm. So, I think that what you mentioned, there
are primarily economic and ecological factors. Are there all
social, social influences that operate on the sexual division
of labor?
Absolutely, there are um social influences. Again, my background
is in behavioral ecology, so I tend to start
with what are the ecological variations. So what's the,
what's going on with the environment and what kind
of subsistence practice are you engaged in. And then
thinking more about the economic system that's built on
top of that, and then I tend to think
about the social system as being built on top
of that. So one of the um One of
the um pieces of research that one of my
PhD students, um, Doctor Catherine Starkweather, who's now at
the University of Illinois Chicago, has done, she was
working in one of the field sites where I've
worked for a long time in rural Bangladesh, and
she's worked with a group of people who are,
um, live on boats, and um they have different
kinds of work that they're doing, but a lot
of times they're fishing, most of the men are
fishing. And a lot of times women are fishing
with their husbands, but sometimes the women are trading
instead, which is a somewhat unusual thing cross cultural.
There's examples in West Africa, there's examples in Southeast
Asia, where women are frequently involved in trade, um,
though in other parts of the world, it's often
the opposite. Um, AND in that particular area, there's
this interesting cultural convention in which these show to
our women can actually go and trade with local
women outside of their group, um, because there's a
social taboo on men going into the homes of
other women and trading with other women. And so
these women, there's a, because of the social convention,
they have a, a kind of a socio-ecological niche
in which they're able to trade. Um, WITH other
women that presents uh an economic opportunity for them
that is uncommon in that culture, but it's also
uncommon cross culturally and so many women then will
go and trade. In the dry season, and they're
spending all their time away from home and their
husbands and uh relatives are watching their children, but
usually when they have very young children, they don't
go to trade because you can't drag an infant
with you for 12 hours a day walking with
large packs on your head and taking buses and
doing all this stuff. Um, YEAH.
So, but, but also, if I understand it correctly,
it's not just the kinds of activities that men
or women tend to participate in, but there's also
across different societies, more or higher or lower degrees
of overlap between men and women when it comes
to the activities they participate in. Is that correct?
Absolutely. So, I mean, I was giving the example
earlier of hunting and gathering. And so, um, where
you often see on average men are doing more
hunting and then women are on average are doing
more gathering, but that's not true in all cases.
There's a lot of overlap. So you're right, one
of the big differences across cultures is how much
of a sexual division of labor you see. So
one of the things that's really interesting in modern
um wage labor economies, so sort of the modern
global market economies where you have a lot of
education-based jobs that you see less division of labor
for certain kinds of jobs than you used to
do um in the past, um. Both because it
becomes possible for families to have people who are
specialized in different things because you're getting so much
of your food from the market through money and
it doesn't exactly matter how you're getting the money.
But also because um So much of the, the
labor that otherwise one or the other parent might
be doing is actually being done. You know, by
daycare centers or in the market or things that
are pay you pay for food, right? And sometimes
you can pay people to cook your food too.
And so there's a lot of um You see
a lot of difference and so you see a
lot more um Potential for reductions in uh sexual
divisions of labor in market economies than you have
in other kinds of um contexts.
Mhm. So, I would like to ask you now
about some of your work on kinship systems. So,
first of all, tell us, generally, what are kinship
systems and what kinds of questions do you tend
to be more interested in when it comes to
them?
So kinship systems are um a fairly, I mean,
all animals have potentially kinship systems in the sense
that they live in groups, if they live in
groups at all, they may are likely to live
in groups with more or less kin, and the
kin is more related to females versus males in
a group. So, in most primate societies, it's more
common that you see that females will stay in
a group together and males will move between groups.
Um, Chimpanzees, for example, are quite interestingly different in
the fact that um the males stay in groups
together and do some social cooperation, and then females
will move to new groups. And um Humans are
particularly interesting kinship wise, because We have what Bernard
Chappe and others have identified as we have both
a dissent system like we know over time, you
know, who you're related to, like, you know, your
mothers or your fathers and their family, and you're
you often not always living with one side or
the other. Um, BUT then you also, we also
have, um, systems of affiliation through marriage, and because
of that, we often create new relatives through marriage
and new kinship ties through marriage, and so we
have both a kind of a dissent systems and
also what various people have referred to as alliance
systems through marriage. And um a lot of people
have argued that, um, particularly Robin Fox and Bernard
Chape that, you know, primate. Other primates tend to
have one or the other more or less, and
we have both, and we have very elaborated versions
of both descent and alliance. And so kinship systems,
um, there's a whole bunch of different factors. A
lot of them are about who do you say
you're more, you're biologically related equally to your mother
and father, right, and your mothers and fathers kin.
But for the purposes of cooperation in different socio
ecological circumstances, humans have different systems where you have
lineage systems that are either often patrilineal, where dissent
is reckoned through the male line. And you're cooperating
with relatives who are reckoned through the male line,
or matrilineal systems in which you're cooperating with relatives
reckon through the female line instead. There's a lot
of patterns about how this is, um, how this
varies cross-culturally. There's a lot of flexibility in hunter-gatherers.
In horticulturalists, we see a lot of patrilineal and
matrilineal systems. The pastoralist systems tend to be more
strongly, um, patrilineal. And agricultural systems, sort of one
or the other, and then when we start to
get to Um, intensive agriculture and inheritance of land,
and also in market economies, you tend to see,
uh, this, a shift in those contexts to smaller
groups of kin, um, smaller lineage systems and or
the kind of lack of a lineage system altogether
in what we call bilateral kinship, which is a
kinship system that's often sometimes referred to as a
Euro-American system, at least Euro-American system from the past
couple of centuries in which you have Your kin
or reckoned through both the male and female line,
and you're kind of equally interacting with, with um
both sets of relatives. So there's a bunch of
different kinships and again, like, the systems tend to
vary a lot by ecology.
Mhm. Yeah, I want to ask you a little
bit about those ecological factors, but just before that,
just to tackle a little bit more the terminology
here, when people talk about, for example, Matrilocal or
patrilocal societies, what they mean by that is the
side of your family that you tend to live
with.
Right. Yes, and specifically, anthropologists often refer to those
terms as relating to post-marital residents. So in other
words, the side of the family that you tend
to live with, but usually people switch residences at
marriage if they're going to switch residents. And so
patrolocal, so if it's a, so patrolocal would mean
that you would go as a, as a bride,
as a wife, you would go to live with
your husband's kin. And natural local typically would refer
to a situation in which you go to live
with the wife's skin, the husband comes to live
with the wife's kin. There's also an, a common
residence practice called neo-local residence in which the, the
couple creates a new household for themselves either sort
of near one of the others or in a
completely new place. And then that's, that's commonly true.
And then there's some either um rarer forms in
which um People don't really establish a long-term residence
with one set of kin or the other, and
they might go to live with one and then
another. So, for example, multi-locality and many foraging groups,
you might live with one group for a while,
but then you often may be moving over time
with other groups, and then there's some places where
you can choose where you're moving. But um a
lot of people would make a distinction between systems
of um dissent, where we're reckoning either through the
male line or the female line or both. So
that would be patrilineal, matrilineal or um bilateral or
and then residents, which is usually like where we're
moving typically after marriage or as adults, um, and
frequently they're correlated with each other, but they're not
always. So sometimes you actually have unique situations in
which you have dissent is, you know, patrilineal, but
lots of people are living natural locally, but those
are unusual, but you do see that kind of
thing.
But is it, uh, I mean, looking across the
societies we have studied, do we see, for example,
patterns, is it that, for example, one of these
uh sort of kin kinship systems, the patrilineal or
the matrilineal, for example, is more common than the
other or not?
Yes, yes. So in humans, we have a lot
more examples uh in um In the extant ethnographic
record, that is the record that we have from
um ethnographic and historical documents from the past 2
or 3 centuries, maybe 4 or 5 centuries, um,
that patrilineal systems are much more common than matrilineal
systems, but, um, as I've written, um, in, we
have a paper in Philoical transactions of the Royal
Society with some colleagues in 2019. We, one of
the arguments that we've made is that in part,
that might be because of the time at which
in his history in which we're collecting the data.
So, the most common types of societies in which
you see common matrilineal inheritance practices or matrilineal descent.
Our horticultural systems in which um labor is done,
you're farming, but labor is done by hand, and
typically, you're not, um, typically you have a, it's
what, it's called labor limited kind of farming in
which you could farm more. More gardens if you
had more people to do it, but you have,
you don't have enough people to farm all the
land. And this is a contrast with land-limited societies,
which we're more familiar with from Europe and Asia,
in which people land inheritance is very important, land
is limited, um, and you have a different sort
of social system because of that. But in horticultural
societies, we see that matrilineality is pretty common. And
what you find historically is that a lot of
times the ethnographic data we have are from a
time in history when a lot of the communities
might have been practicing horticulture or might have been
matrilineal, but then a lot of them were being
Either forcibly transitioned away from that by um colonial
governments, or transitioning because they were becoming part of
a global market economy with which had different sort
of socio-ecological You know, conditions, and so they were
changing to a more bilateral or more patrilineal system.
And so, we're actually examining in this paper, um,
what we saw in terms of transitions to and
from matriline and what we found was that you
did see some legitimate examples of transitions to and
from matroina, but that again, the whole pattern that
we saw with naturalin being less common. Really seemed
like it was, might be an artifact of the
fact that we were collecting a lot of the
ethnographic data in the colonial era. And if we
had been able to magically go back 1000 years
ago or 2000 years ago in history and just
sample all the societies at that time, we could
have had um a different pattern, because based on
the different kinds of subsistence patterns that people were
practicing around the world. But uh, Intensive agriculture uh
tended to push things more towards patrilineality and uh
or neolo or sorry bilateral um kinship in the
sort of um more modern era in many parts
of the world.
So, it just crossed my mind in terms of
uh a particular society having uh matrilineal or a
patrilineal kinship system. Does it have any relationship at
all with paternity and certainty or not?
Sure, some people have written about this. Um, ONE
of the arguments is that in If you're in
more patrilineal systems, you are, there's often more concern
about enforcing paternity certainty, meaning that the father, the
man who's married to the woman is the father
of that child, and that tends to be a
strong social norm in certain kinds of societies. And
historically, I would say societies where you have um
a strong importance on inheritance, and you have land
limited societies where you're trying to um really keep
inheritance in a particular line. Um, THOSE types of
societies, which have been common historically in Europe and
Asia, for example, and also in other parts of
the world as well. But um those kinds of
societies have tended to be very concerned with paternity
certainty. Um, IN other parts of the world. There's
different social relationships and so there may be less
enforcement of paternity certainty, um. And less concern about
it, um, because there's other, there's other concerns that
people have, the alliance between groups, for example, or
um recruitment of labor, um, in context where in
order to really do well, you need a large
pool of labor and a large community locally to
do a lot of farming and to really engage
in um economic and social activities. So there's been,
there's an argument that there's often more um of
a focus on fraternity certainty and patrilineal context, but
that also an underlying context where um Where inheritance
is very important. Mhm.
So I would like to ask you, uh, still
on the topic of kinship systems about, uh, directly
more about some of the work you've done on
it. So could you tell us in what ways
might kinship systems relate to the distribution of material
resources and the rise of gender disparities?
Sure. So, so. One of the arguments for why
patrilineal inheritance is more common in large scale agricultural
societies, for example, is that You're defending a group
of resources, right? You're defending agricultural land, for example,
um, which is very valuable, and that, that kind
of defensive property is often done by um cooperative
groups of men. And that kind of male cooperation
is facilitated in context where you have a lot
of um uh male relatives are living near each
other. So that's one kind of argument. On the
other hand, we do definitely see examples where, so
in many, many parts of the world, the land
is inherited. PATRILINEALLY, um, and defended by groups of
men, although we do see um counterexamples, particularly in
Southeast Asia where Land is often or sometimes inherited
matrilineally as well. Um, AND in those contexts, um,
Basically, there might be other social norms about how
you have inheritance or um defense of property, um.
In There tends to also be a norm, again,
on average in patrilineal societies. That property is going
through the male line, and there might be a
concentration of inheritance in sons instead of daughters. Um,
SO, for example, that land might uh pass to
sons traditionally rather than passing to daughters, whereas in
matrilineal systems, it might be more likely to pass
to daughters, but in many matrilineal systems, land actually
also passes to sons, but just through the mother's
line, rather than the father's line. So I would
say. Matrilineal systems, there's more of a focus on
inheritance to sons and matrilineal systems that can be
inheritance to sons or daughters. You can also have
lots of context in which um some inheritance These
are something called dual dissent systems in which inheritance
or is coming to children through um Through the
male line, some things are coming to children and
it's coming through the female line. Some other things
are inherited through or just descend through the female
line. That's less common, but it does happen. But
you do also have women's wealth that can be
passed from mothers to daughters, even in very patrilineal
contexts. So you see a lot of this um
in um sort of pre-modern Britain, for example, or
other parts of parts of South Asia, for example,
where A woman would bring property into a marriage,
and then that property would not go to her
sons, but instead go to her daughters to pay
for their dowries. In some cases. So there's, there's
a lot of different examples. I'm not sure if
you have another more specific question in mind.
Yeah, I was going to ask you, is, is
it, is it possible to make any uh or
to generalize in the sense that is it possible
for us to say whether one particular kind of
kinship system tends to lead to more gender disparities
than the other?
So there's a lot of arguments that um patrilineal
systems on average are less gender egalitarian than matrilineal
systems. Um, THERE'S not This is mostly, most of
the evidence for this is based on ethnographic observations
and descriptions, um, less of it's been based on
um Basically research, right, direct tests of that. But
um some colleagues of mine and I were able
to test this using um data from a field
site, a couple of field sites in um Southwest
China with an um ethnic group called the Moo.
This is work mainly led by my colleague Siobhan
Madison, um, uh, she also more recently is publishing
under Siobhan Kulley. And in those cases, Basically, that's
an ethnic group in which there are both a
matrilineal and a patrial patrilineal subcommunities of the same
ethnic groups. So they have the same language, same
general customs, but groups that are living in the
mountains, live in more patrilineal patrilocal settings, and groups
that live in the valley and near this, in
this Lugu Lake, it's a large, um beautiful lake
in China that's well known recently as a tourist
area. Um, THE people who live in the valleys
have these matrilineal compounds and um where Adult brothers
will actually frequently stay with their adult sisters throughout
their lifetimes, and they often have um children uh
with women, but then the children and the mothers
will stay in separately, so that the parents are
not always moving in with each other. This is
changing, but traditionally, adult brothers and sisters stay living
with each other. Um, IN the matrilineal Moso case,
and in the patrilineal Moso case, you had patro
local residents where daughters would leave and join their
husbands at marriage. So in this particular context, we
were looking at health outcomes, and what we found
was that um Really Um, men and women were
both in pretty good equal health in the um
matrilineal context, but women tended to have worse health
than men in the patrilineal context, which is in
line with some of the um arguments that have
been made, again, largely qualitatively, that patrilineal systems, in
at least in some circumstances, Um, may not benefit
women's health as much or women might face more,
um, marginalization or health risks or other risks because
of in those systems. Again, that's a generalization. There's
a lot of variation within patrilinear systems in terms
of how much gender equality or inequality there is.
Some systems are much more equal than others, but
on average, Um, most people have found or suggested
that matrilineal systems have more gender equality and or
sometimes bilateral systems also have more gender equality than
do very strictly patrilineal systems.
So, uh just before we change topics, since you
are usually interested in the ecological factors, when it
comes to the distribution of material resources and inheritance,
for example, are there any particular ecological Factors that
explain why in a particular society, it might be
the boys who are, or the men who are
benefited more than the women or vice versa in
terms of inheritance and distribution of resources.
Yeah. So, as I've said before, in patrilineal context,
there's, it's often true that because you have cooperation
among male kin, or it becomes important in those
contexts, that inheritance is often going to sons, more
so than daughters or sons may get a larger
stake of the inheritance and daughters. Also, On average
in patrilineal context, daughters are moving um outside of
the family group at marriage, and they're in a
new group, and that means when you're coming into
a new group. You may actually start at the
bottom of the socioeconomic kind of scale and you
have to work your way up over time. So,
both there may be sort of gender um kind
of preferences given to sons in patrilineal context. Again,
not all of them, but many of them. And
also daughters might be in a situation where because
they're moving out of the family and into another
family, they might get less investment at home and
or they might be in a less good position
in their husband's house. And so those are the
patterns that I think most people would argue underlie.
Um, PATTERNS of poor health or lower levels of
inheritance for women in patrilineal contexts. Whereas in matrilineal
contexts, daughters are more likely to inherit larger portions
of wealth, even if they don't inherit all of
it. And they often are spending more of their
life if they're matrilocal, they're spending more of their
life with their maternal kin. And those are often
contexts in which they might be they might face
less discrimination or they might um be sort of
in a better social position and therefore, again, might
have better health outcomes because of that. And that's
certainly the argument, um, generally speaking, the argument that
we were making in. In on that paper, but
I would also say that um there's a certain
amount of, uh, yeah, there's a lot of variation
in these kinds of context. So you can say,
again, on average, you might see more um gender
inequality and patrilineal than matrilineal systems, but we're still
gonna see variation across those kinds of societies. Yeah.
Right. So, I would like to ask you a
little bit about religion and fertility now. I've already
talked on the show with many cognitive scientists of
religion, anthropologists of religion, and other scientists of religion
more generally. And one of the things that is
frequently brought What up is how religion seems to
bring fitness benefits to its practitioner. So, first of
all, do you agree with that? And if so,
in what ways does religion relate to fertility? I
mean, how is the link established
there? Sure, yeah. So I want to get into
now um some of the work I've been doing
recently with some colleagues, the main Uh, lead investigator
on this project is um John Shaver, who was
at the University of Otago in New Zealand. He's
now at Baylor University. We're also collaborating with Richard
Sosis from the University of Connecticut and Rebeccai, who's
currently at Brunel University in London. Um, AND so,
as you said, one of the big, the big
arguments from an evolutionary perspective is that Religion brings
a lot of cooperative benefits to its practitioners, and
those cooperative benefits could benefit people economically, but they
could also benefit mental health and levels of stress,
um, and they can also benefit you in a
variety of ways. So we have made the argument,
this is following on some early work from John
Shaver, um, Kind of proposed something called the religious
allop parenting hypothesis, which essentially says, OK, we, we
have, we know, or most people would argue that
religion promotes cooperation. We also know that humans, one
of our main um sort of mechanisms related with
fertility in humans, that's fairly unique. At least among
related groups of primates is aloe parenting. We got
lots and lots of aloe parenting in most societies
that we rely on lots of kin, especially grandmothers,
but also fathers, husbands, um, and older siblings, um,
to help us with childcare. And so the argument
is, if religion is promoting cooperation among the a
social group, And cooperation is promoting aloe parenting, so
we are getting more aloe parenting, um, or higher
quality care, more support of some kind, that this
could um be the mechanism, or at least a
key mechanism behind a known relationship between religion and
fertility, that is more religious people or more religious
groups traditionally in many, many contexts have more children.
Then uh less religious groups. And so we've been
testing this idea and um some existing data sets.
And there's 2 or 3 papers published on that
and then we've also been testing this idea in
a variety of new data sets that we have
just uh collected in um in my field sites
in India and Bangladesh, so Matla Bangladesh and Beer
Boom, India, and then um sites in Malawi and
in The Gambia, and then we also have a
research site in Pittsburgh where we're kind of Putting
together some research where we're connecting. OK, religiosity related
to cooperation, religiosity being linked to allop parenting, and
then religiosity and or all parenting being linked to
either fertility, so having more kids, or those kids
having better outcomes, better health, for example. Um, SO
that, that's the work we're working on right now.
And I think so far, the evidence suggests that
this is probably true. Um, AND, uh, but the
details of it, I think, are still being worked
out.
Mhm. Uh, BUT when it comes to the potential
fitness benefits apart from your suggestion, suggestion having to
do with Llo parenting, are there other ways, mechanisms
by which religion promotes fertility?
Sure. So there's a literature on this, um, That's
quite, so I think again, the thing I'm especially
interested in as an evolutionary scientist is the our
parenting mechanism, but there's 2 or 3 other arguments
out of there in the literature about the relationship
between religion and fertility. And one of the arguments
is that it's somehow something about the content of
the religion itself. So the messages of the religion.
A lot of world religions are pretty pro-natalist, meaning
that they, they tell people that they should have
kids. This is certainly true in Christianity and in
Islam. Um, IT'S true in other world religions in
many contexts as well. People will argue that Judaism
is pro-natalist. They will argue that in some contexts,
Hinduism is, so that's, I think a little bit
less clear. Um, But so some people argue that
the content of the religion is motivating people to
have more kids. Um, I think that there's probably
some evidence that that's true, but I also think
the evidence for that is mixed. Another argument that's
made in the literature is that um, One of
the reasons you have a relationship between religion and
fertility in some context is because of um the
minority status of particular religion. So if a group
of religious people are in a minority, they may
be um motivated to Especially if they're facing marginalization
or discrimination that they may be motivated to improve
their own um sort of situation by having more
children and thus be in a less marginalized position,
more people in the group to cooperate with, etc.
Again, there's evidence that whatever the mechanism is, whether
or not it's a conscious mechanism or a subconscious
mechanism, it's harder to tell, but It's certainly true
that in many contexts, um, marginalized religious groups have
higher fertility than um less marginalized religious or more
sort of socially dominant religious groups. There are some
context though, in which it looks like more marginalized
groups have lower fertility, and so there's actually, um,
there's actually some debate, and the, the, the research
that I'm aware of on this suggests that there's
sort of two patterns and one is where You're
more marginalized, and because of that, there's some, there's
in-group dynamics that are motivating you to kind of
bolster your own community, um, which might be related
to higher fertility, and then in other cases where
you're trying to kind of become accepted in a
minority in a majority context and some of those
contexts, people would have fewer children. Um, So I'm
thinking about there's one of the other arguments about
um this relationship that's commonly found between religion and
fertility, in fact, is that it's not really about
religion, but that it's about an artifact of not
controlling very well for socioeconomic differences among groups and
It's pretty clear if you look at this literature
that that's at least partly true, but it's also
pretty clear to me, at least we would do
one of my um former PhD um students, or
at least I worked with her and she's a
PhD student. Part of her dissertation uses DHS data
from India, Bangladesh, and Nepal and looks at Hindu
and Muslim communities and what we We seem to
find that, um, so using a mechanism called propensity
score matching, in which you match people across religious
groups in terms of their socioeconomic characteristics to create
a sample that allows you to try to get
rid of socioeconomic variation as one of the main
drivers. And what we find is that that um
reduces the religious variation, um, the religious comparison across
groups in terms of fertility, but it doesn't fully
get rid of it. Which could either mean that
you're not, that the mechanism isn't that the method
isn't totally getting rid of economic differences, or it
could mean that there's also other things going on.
And so our argument in that paper, which again
is published in a dissertation, but we're working on
getting ready to submit that soon, um. Is that,
you know, I think there's that this this sort
of uncontrolled economic differences is part of what's going
on, but that these other kinds of things. Whether
it's religious aloe parenting or the actual message of
the religion and or these minority and majority differences
are also probably playing a role in the relationship
between religion and fertility, which again is quite well
known that there is one. SO we're really trying
to especially um spend more time sorting out the
mechanisms of how that's happening.
Very interesting. So, uh, still on the topic of
fertility, but now, let's move from religion. Uh, IN
recent times, people have been talking a lot about
fertility decline across the world. Some people worry a
lot about that. And with the focus, of course,
on the more developed countries. And, uh, I want
to ask you about the factors. Behind that, but,
uh, to start off with, I would like to
focus on one that is mentioned that has to
do with women's education. I mean, is there really
a link between women's education and fertility levels? And
if so, do we know exactly how education might
influence fertility?
So there is a very strong link between women's
education and fertility with more education being associated with
lower fertility. This is true. VIRTUALLY everywhere that this
relationship has been tested with very few um counterexamples.
Um, AND it's, it tends to also be um
one of the stronger predictors if you have it
in a model of fertility. Education seems to be
one of the stronger predictors. In terms of the
reason for that, um, I think this is more
complicated, but, um, I think personally, and I've written
about this, I have a 2013 paper in PNAS
and then we have a 2016 paper with some
colleagues also in philosophical transactions of the Royal Society,
and, uh, in a couple of other places. I
think one of the reasons for that education has
this very strong relationship with fertility is that It's
tapping into itself as that one variable is tapping
into multiple mechanisms, which I think are driving reduced
fertility, including Um, a trade-off in women's time, the
amount of time you spent getting education is often
taking you away from time that you might spend
having children, and so, or you might get married
later, you might start having children later. Um, ALSO,
education tends to be associated with wage labor economies
in which there's A lot of emphasis on investing
more in a smaller number of children. And so
because of that, and the women who are more
involved in the labor market tend to be more
involved in that, you know, let's have fewer children
and invest more in them. And then also I
would say education goes along with cultural transmission of
social norms of lower fertility as well. And so
for all of these reasons, um, there's actually even
more cause you could say about fertility. It's really
um a very good indicator of a whole bunch
of different things, different patterns that are associated with
lower fertility. Um, BUT women's education is, and I
think that's why it's such a strong predictor globally
because it's, it's tapping into multiple mechanisms by which
fertility is going down.
I was wondering, do levels of education, of course,
in this case, we're focusing on women, but perhaps
what I'm about to say would also apply to
men, but do levels of education also have something
to do with perhaps people investing more or being
more open to family planning and to the use
of contraceptives?
Sure, that's actually another thing I was saying there's
even more going on with education and that's one
of the things. Um, PEOPLE might be more open
to the use of contraception or contraception or more
knowledgeable about how to use it more appropriately. Um,
THEY also might um have better information about child
health and be in a better position to, um,
kind of keep their children healthy. And again, if
you're having a lot of children are dying, that's
one motivation people have for having more children, whereas
if your children are living and You feel like
you can get good healthcare for them. You're more
usually uh interested in having fewer children. But that's
absolutely true. I will say though, about contraception, that
is, I think this is actually much more complicated
than a lot of people think it is in
the sense that Um, I would say the argument
is stronger that people adopt contraception or in the
case of historical Europe, invent contraception when they want
to reduce fertility. Uh, AND there's lots of examples
where contraception is introduced in high fertility societies and
people are not interested, or they use it to
space children out and reduce child mortality, and so
it's actually not associated with reduced fertility. So, um,
contraception, I tend to think of it as a
tool that you use to reduce fertility in the
context where you want it or you reduce fertility.
So typically, contraception will help bring fertility down in
places where people wanted, we're already trying to reduce
fertility, and if you just give it to people,
For whom large numbers of children is associated with
status and wealth, and, you know, having a lot
of farm labor and that's really useful for them.
They may or may not reduce their fertility if
you just give contraception. So I think it's, it's
a tool we use, but I don't think it's
a driver, at least that's my personal opinion. I
don't think it's a driver in the same sense.
Mhm.
And are there other well studied factors that might
play a role in the decline in fertility, particularly
among more developed countries? I mean, could there be,
I don't know, also economic factors or factors of
other sort?
Yeah. So what I really think is one of
the big, there's a lot of um people who've
argued this over the years in different forms, many
economists as well. Um, BUT I think Probably one
of the strongest drivers of fertility decline in recent
years, um, since is the industrial revolution and modern
market economies that follow from the industrial revolution. Essentially,
you're going from a situation in which Having lots
of children, um, is that the children are essentially
kind of helping you on the farm, helping you
with pastoralist labor, helping you with farm labor and
they're kind of paying part of their own way,
right? Because they're helping with other children and they're
helping with agricultural labor, so more children. Generally is
associated with more prosperity and a lot of these
traditional contexts
in those specific in the specific context, children also
sort of work as economic assets.
Yes, exactly. They work as, I mean. There is
this argument that some people would say if they're
just economic assets, what the sort of um Ron
Lee and Karen Kramer, that's an economist and anthropologist
team did a more detailed talk about them. They're
like, OK, it always costs you, you always have
to Costs you energy to have children, but what's
happening with children who are doing farm labor is
they're paying for like at least half or more
of what you're, they're reducing their own costs because
of the work that they're doing. So even though
you have to feed them and clothe them and
you're giving more resources and energy to them then
you're getting back from them but they're paying for
a lot of their costs. Whereas think about a
modern market economy. Kids aren't allowed to work, they
have to spend all their time in school, and
parents end up spending a huge amount of parental
time and money trying to support and raise children.
And so often with more limited help. And so
you have a situation which Um, the children in
more sort of farming and pastoral herding economies are
really paying for a lot of their own, you
know, resources. They're subsidizing their their themselves. Um, SO
economically, you have this situation which the kids are
kind of, they're an asset and they're paying for
themselves, at least partially, and you have a lot
of benefits coming out of larger, you know, numbers
of children to a context in which everything is
Kind of more expensive and the benefits are reduced.
So, um, kids are going to school and you
have to pay for that, either that or even
if you don't have to pay money for that,
the kids can't help you at home or on
the farm when you're at school. Um, WHEN they're
at school. Also, there becomes a lot of social
competition for more education to get in particular kinds
of jobs. And the time and effort it takes
to really um make children competitive is something you
just can't, you can't have 10 children and do
that. They're huge trade-offs if you have larger numbers
of children in market economies in a way that
they're frequently aren't in sort of um kind of
agriculturalist, traditional agriculturalist economies. And you also see really
steep trade-offs for parents' time, and this is often
true for mothers' time, more so even that if
mothers are working or they're getting education, there's other
things they're doing that are helping the social status
and economic well-being of the family. Those things often
are trading off in the ability to put that
time and energy, that time especially into children. And
this is true for fathers too, um, but it's
especially changes a lot for mothers in these contexts
where they're, you're working in an office becomes incompatible
with childcare. You can't really do one and the
other, and you're sort of in a situation where
you have to, um, you have to choose. And
so all of these things, the rising costs of
children, And also the rising sort of economic competitiveness
of modern markets all pushes people towards a more
um investing in a lot in higher child quality
and having fewer children overall.
Mhm. So, as the last topic for our conversation
today, I would like to ask you about social
and economic inequality. So, um, what are the factors
that play a role in the transition from relatively
equal societies to increasingly unequal societies, which is something
that we have observed over the course of human
history.
Yeah. So there's a bunch of different factors that
people would point to, but one that we've published
on, and this is especially, um, I think you
can see the argument very clearly in a 2016
paper, Madison at all in evolutionary Anthropology, and then
this is also in a variety of other papers
of mine as well. Um, IT'S an argument that
it's one of the major drivers is economic defensibility
of resources. So if you go from So think
about the example that we I gave earlier about
the difference between horticulture and agriculture. If you have
a horticulture with hand tools and there's lots of
land that you could farm, but you don't have
enough people to farm it, that's really the trade-off.
Typically, in those cases, there's some inequality locally. There's
a local tribal chief or a local leader of
some kind, but the inequality can't be that much
because there's just Um, there's relatively less competition for
land and other things, whereas as soon as you
start to get, for example, Really good arable land
in a river valley where it's really, really great
for agriculture. Then I have the land and I'm
farming it, but other people would also like the
land, and so there ends up being a massive
amount of social competition for those kinds of resources.
So you can start to get a whole lot.
Of social changes, because of resource defensibility like that.
So, for example, we start to get I switch
from polygyny to monogamy alongside um these kinds of
um Heritable or defensible resources, we get a switch
from um sort of more egalitarian social groups to
more um Kind of hierarchical social groups, uh, with
a lot more um social complexity, meaning like different
layers and different kinds of things. So you have
the rights of social classes and caste systems and
things like this. Um, AND then you can get,
um, there's a whole bunch of sort of complicated
sort of social machinery and um social norms, etc.
THAT get become part of those things. But I
would most of the argument is that what this
really seems to go back to is economic defensibility
either of land. Or you also see economically defensible
um societies with increasing hierarchy even among people who
are not doing much farming. For example, it would
be the Pacific Northwest coast of North America, historically
is well known for this. Where the economic differences
were really based on who um had access to
these very rich salmon runs, right, these salmon rivers
where you would have huge, huge numbers of salmon
coming to spawn in the rivers, you could get
lots and lots of resources from sitting on those
rivers and therefore you develop property rights, right? So
you have the development of any economically defensible resources
lead to things like property rights and then a
whole bunch of social machinery that goes on to
defend it. And I would say, That one of
the other things that some colleagues and I have
worked on, we have a paper uh also in
this in 2016, Shank Kaplan and Hooper, where we,
we model this and we also show that um
Social competition and increasing inequality is probably one of
the things that reduces fertility as well. It increases
this motivation of young parents to um invent, invest
intensively in an even smaller number of children. So
even though the transition from an agricultural to a
market economy would reduce the number of children, if
you have inequality and increased social competition, People are
really motivated. They'd like to become, move up the
social hierarchy, but it becomes even harder to just
stay in your same place in the social hierarchy,
um, stay in your same place economically, and that
this can also lead to um fertility reduction in
small numbers of children. And this is an argument
that's been made for the Um, one of the
two major arguments that's made for, um, parts of
the world with really low levels of fertility these
days, so under 2 children per woman. So for
example, you think about arguments about South Korea, which
has a TFR of 1.1 or 1.3, that a
lot of this has been related to social competition,
these really intensive social competition in that context. The
other one, there's about women's trade-offs as well that
you where you see more in Southern Europe, you
see arguments about that.
So, I mean, maybe again, earlier I asked you
when it comes to fertility levels, if there were
economic factors that played the role here and so,
uh, higher levels of economic inequality might also have
an effect on fertility rates,
right? Yes, that, that's the argument and I that
um in addition to sort of market economies that
inequality would should be associated with um Increase, increased
reduction, right? So low, even lower fertility rates than
it would be in a more sort of economically
cool society that was similarly, similar economically. Yeah, that's
the argument. Mhm.
Great. So, Doctor Shenk, just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you when you work on the internet?
Yeah, sure. I think um you can go to
my website at Penn State University, and I think
the other good place to see my work and
potentially download some of it would be on Research
Gate. Which is a place where I put things.
I'm not um a big social media person in
other ways, but I think Research gate is and
my website are great places to get um access
to papers. You can also email me if you
don't find something, but most of it's up there.
Great. So I'm leaving links to that in the
description of the interview and thank you so much
again for taking the time to come on the
show. It's been a very fascinating conversation.
Thanks. Yeah, this was really fun. Thanks very much
for having me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labrasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zaledrianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton
Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier,
bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry
Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake
Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson,
Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda
Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman,
Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR
Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory
Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos
Net. A special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis
Dixon, Benick Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers, Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.